name	acronym	tissue	repository	disease	species	numSamples	description
TCGA_Bladder Urothelial Carcinoma	BLCA	Bladder	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	89	Urothelial bladder cancer is the most common type of bladder cancer. The bladder is a hollow organ that holds liquid waste, or urine, produced by the kidneys. Invasive bladder cancer develops in the inner lining of the bladder wall and grows finger-like projections, called papillary tumors, into the hollow part of the bladder. In 2010, it was estimated that 70,500 people would be diagnosed with bladder cancer and an estimated 15,000 would die from it. Urothelial bladder cancer is more common among men than women. From 2003-2007, the median age of death from bladder cancer was 78 years of age. If the cancer is diagnosed after it has metastasized, as few as five percent of patients will be living five years after diagnosis.
TCGA_Breast invasive carcinoma	BRCA	Breast	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	864	This cancer starts in the tissues of the breast. Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the second cause of cancer deaths in women. In 2010, 207,090 women were estimated to have been diagnosed with invasive breast cancer in the United States and approximately 40,000 women were estimated to have died of their disease. Men can also have breast cancer, although male breast cancer is rare. In 2010, 1,970 American men were estimated to have been diagnosed and 390 were estimated to have died of breast cancer. Due to early detection through use of mammograms and improvements in treatment, breast cancer deaths have steadily decreased since the 1990s. The TCGA will focus mostly on two types of invasive breast cancer: ductal carcinoma and lobular carcinoma. Invasive ductal carcinoma is the most common type of breast cancer. It comprises about 65 to 85 percent of all breast cancer and develops in the milk ducts of the breast. About 10 percent of all cases of advanced breast cancer are invasive lobular breast carcinoma. This cancer develops in the breast milk-producing lobules or glands.
TCGA_Cervical squamous cell carcinoma and endocervical adenocarcinoma	CESC	Ovarian	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	99	Cervical cancer is the term for a malignant neoplasm arising from cells originating in the cervix uteri. Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection appears to be a necessary factor in the development of almost all cases (90+%) of cervical cancer. The cervix is the narrow portion of the uterus where it joins with the top of the vagina. Most cervical cancers are squamous cell carcinomas, arising in the squamous (flattened) epithelial cells that line the cervix. Adenocarcinoma, arising in glandular epithelial cells is the second most common type. Very rarely, cancer can arise in other types of cells in the cervix.
TCGA_Controls	CNTL	Unknown	TCGA	None	Homo sapiens	3	Unclear what this is.
TCGA_Colon adenocarcinoma	COAD	Colon	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	423	Colon and rectal adenocarcinomas are the third most commonly diagnosed cancers in both men and women and account for nine percent of all cancer deaths. The colon and rectum are part of the digestive system and cancer forms in the colon and/or the rectum. These digestive system cancers are often referred to as colorectal cancer. In 2010, an estimated 102,600 Americans were expected to have been diagnosed with colon cancer and another 39,670 were expected to have been diagnosed with rectal cancer. In addition, 51,370 Americans were estimated to have died of colorectal cancer in 2010. More than 90 percent of colorectal cancer occurs after age 50 and the average age at diagnosis is 72. When colorectal cancer has spread to other parts of the body, only 11 percent of patients will survive five years from the date of their diagnosis. Colorectal death rates have been declining since 1998, due to the increased use of screening tests that allow detection and removal of colon polyps before they progress to cancer.
TCGA_Lymphoid Neoplasm Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma	DLBC	Blood	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	27	Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBL, DLBCL, or DLCL) is a type of aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma. It accounts for approximately 40% of lymphomas among adults. The median age at diagnosis is 70 years, but it also occurs in children and young adults. As with most non-Hodgkin lymphomas, there is a male predominance, although primary cutaneous diffuse large B cell lymphoma is more common in women. Of all cancers involving the same class of blood cell, 31% of cases are DLBL.
TCGA_Glioblastoma multiforme	GBM	Brain	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	599	Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM or grade IV astrocytoma) is a fast-growing type of malignant brain tumor that is the most common brain tumor in adults. In 2010, more than 22,000 Americans were estimated to have been diagnosed and 13,140 were estimated to have died from brain and other nervous system cancers. GBM accounts for about 15 percent of all brain tumors and occurs in adults between the ages of 45 to 70 years. Patients with GBM have a poor prognosis and usually survive less than 15 months following diagnosis. Currently there are no effective long-term treatments for this disease.
TCGA_Head and Neck squamous cell carcinoma	HNSC	Skin	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	294	Most head and neck cancers begin in the moist, mucus membranes lining the inside of the mouth, nose and throat. These membranes are made up of squamous cells and the head and neck cancers that grow in these cells are called squamous cell carcinomas. These cancers most often affect people over the age of 50 and the rates in men are more than twice as high as the rates in women.1 In 2010, about 36,000 Americans are estimated to have been diagnosed with head and neck cancers and an estimated 7,880 were expected have died of squamous cell carcinomas. Known risks for developing head and neck cancers are smoking and heavy drinking.
TCGA_Kidney renal clear cell carcinoma	KIRC	Kidney	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	502	The most common type of kidney cancer is called renal cell carcinoma. This cancer forms in the cells lining the small tubules in the kidney that filter waste from the blood and make urine. An estimated 58,240 Americans were expected to have been diagnosed with kidney cancer in 2010 and an estimated 13,040 to have died of this cancer. Most people with kidney cancer are usually over 55 years of age and this cancer is more common in men. When detected early, most cases of kidney cancer can be treated effectively. However, survival rates are low when the cancer has spread from the kidney to other parts of the body. TCGA will analyze two subtypes of renal cell carcinoma called clear cell carcinoma and papillary carcinoma. The identification of these subtypes of kidney cancer is based on how the cancer cells look under a microscope. Kidney clear cell carcinoma is the most common type of kidney cancer, representing approximately 92% of such cases. Papillary carcinoma accounts for about 8%.
TCGA_Kidney renal papillary cell carcinoma	KIRP	Kidney	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	103	The most common type of kidney cancer is called renal cell carcinoma. This cancer forms in the cells lining the small tubules in the kidney that filter waste from the blood and make urine. An estimated 58,240 Americans were expected to have been diagnosed with kidney cancer in 2010 and an estimated 13,040 to have died of this cancer. Most people with kidney cancer are usually over 55 years of age and this cancer is more common in men. When detected early, most cases of kidney cancer can be treated effectively. However, survival rates are low when the cancer has spread from the kidney to other parts of the body. TCGA will analyze two subtypes of renal cell carcinoma called clear cell carcinoma and papillary carcinoma. The identification of these subtypes of kidney cancer is based on how the cancer cells look under a microscope. Kidney clear cell carcinoma is the most common type of kidney cancer, representing approximately 92% of such cases. Papillary carcinoma accounts for about 8%.
TCGA_Acute Myeloid Leukemia	LAML	Blood	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	202	Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a cancer of the blood and bone marrow. An acute leukemia can become worse quickly if it is not treated and can result in death within months. AML is the most common type of acute leukemia in American adults and the average age of a patient with AML is 67. In 2010, 12,330 people were estimated to have been diagnosed with AML in the United States, with an estimated 8,950 deaths. Survival decreases with older ages because standard treatments for AML are less tolerated.
TCGA_Brain Lower Grade Glioma	LGG	Brain	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	144	Primary brain tumors are tumors that classified according to their appearance under the microscope. Gliomas are classified into four grades (I, II, III, and IV), and the treatment and prognosis depend upon the tumor grade. Grade I or II tumors are termed low-grade gliomas.
TCGA_Liver hepatocellular carcinoma	LIHC	Liver	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	84	Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC, also called malignant hepatoma) is the most common type of liver cancer. Most cases of HCC are secondary to either a viral hepatitis infection (hepatitis B or C) or cirrhosis (alcoholism being the most common cause of hepatic cirrhosis). Compared to other cancers, HCC is quite a rare tumor in the United States.
TCGA_Lymphoid Neoplasm Non-Hodgkins Lymphoma	LNNH	Blood	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	2	The non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs) are a diverse group of blood cancers that include any kind of lymphoma except Hodgkin's lymphomas. Types of NHL vary significantly in their severity, from indolent to very aggressive. Lymphomas are types of cancer derived from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Lymphomas are treated by combinations of chemotherapy, monoclonal antibodies, immunotherapy, radiation, and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. The latest lymphoma classification, the 2008 WHO classification, largely abandoned the "Hodgkin" vs. "Non-Hodgkin" grouping. Instead, it lists over 80 different forms of lymphomas in four broad groups.
TCGA_Lung adenocarcinoma	LUAD	Lung	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	374	Lung cancer accounts for more deaths than any other cancer in both men and women, about 28 percent of all cancer deaths. In 2010, an estimated 222,520 Americans were expected to have been diagnosed with lung cancer and 157,300 were expected to have died from their disease.1 The prognosis for lung cancer is poor – most lung cancer patients are diagnosed with advanced cancer and only 16 percent of patients will survive for five years after their diagnosis. TCGA researchers are studying the most common type of lung cancer called non-small cell lung cancers. Specifically, the subtypes being studied are called lung adenocarcinoma and lung squamous cell carcinoma.
TCGA_Lung squamous cell carcinoma	LUSC	Lung	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	290	Lung cancer accounts for more deaths than any other cancer in both men and women, about 28 percent of all cancer deaths. In 2010, an estimated 222,520 Americans were expected to have been diagnosed with lung cancer and 157,300 were expected to have died from their disease.1 The prognosis for lung cancer is poor – most lung cancer patients are diagnosed with advanced cancer and only 16 percent of patients will survive for five years after their diagnosis. TCGA researchers are studying the most common type of lung cancer called non-small cell lung cancers. Specifically, the subtypes being studied are called lung adenocarcinoma and lung squamous cell carcinoma.
TCGA_Ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma	OV	Ovarian	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	597	Ovarian cancer occurs in the ovary of a woman’s reproductive system and accounts for about three percent of all cancers in women. In 2010, 21,888 women were estimated to have been diagnosed with ovarian cancer in the United States and 13,850 women were estimated to have died of this disease. Ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma, the cancer being studied by TCGA, is a type of epithelial ovarian cancer and accounts for about 90 percent of all ovarian cancers. Women aged 65 and older are most affected by ovarian cancer. As a result of the lack of effective screening tests, most women are diagnosed with advanced cancer.
TCGA_Pancreatic adenocarcinoma	PAAD	Pancreas	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	48	The most common type of pancreatic cancer, accounting for 95% of these tumors, is adenocarcinoma (tumors exhibiting glandular architecture on light microscopy) arising within the exocrine component of the pancreas. Pancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause of cancer death across the globe. Pancreatic cancer often has a poor prognosis: for all stages combined, the 1- and 5-year relative survival rates are 25% and 6%, respectively; for local disease the 5-year survival is approximately 20% while the median survival for locally advanced and for metastatic disease, which collectively represent over 80% of individuals, is about 10 and 6 months respectively.
TCGA_Prostate adenocarcinoma	PRAD	Prostate	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	153	Prostate cancer is a form of cancer that develops in the prostate, a gland in the male reproductive system. Most prostate cancers are slow growing; however, there are cases of aggressive prostate cancers. The cancer cells may metastasize (spread) from the prostate to other parts of the body, particularly the bones and lymph nodes.
TCGA_Rectum adenocarcinoma	READ	Rectum	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	168	Colon and rectal adenocarcinomas are the third most commonly diagnosed cancers in both men and women and account for nine percent of all cancer deaths. The colon and rectum are part of the digestive system and cancer forms in the colon and/or the rectum. These digestive system cancers are often referred to as colorectal cancer. In 2010, an estimated 102,600 Americans were expected to have been diagnosed with colon cancer and another 39,670 were expected to have been diagnosed with rectal cancer. In addition, 51,370 Americans were estimated to have died of colorectal cancer in 2010. More than 90 percent of colorectal cancer occurs after age 50 and the average age at diagnosis is 72. When colorectal cancer has spread to other parts of the body, only 11 percent of patients will survive five years from the date of their diagnosis. Colorectal death rates have been declining since 1998, due to the increased use of screening tests that allow detection and removal of colon polyps before they progress to cancer.
TCGA_Sarcoma	SARC	Unknown	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	21	Unclear what this is.
TCGA_Skin Cutaneous Melanoma	SKCM	Skin	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	253	Melanoma is a malignant tumor of melanocytes. Melanoma is less common than other skin cancers. However, it is much more dangerous and causes the majority (75%) of deaths related to skin cancer. Worldwide, doctors diagnose about 160,000 new cases of melanoma yearly. The diagnosis is more frequent in women than in men and is particularly common among Caucasians, especially northern Europeans living in sunny climates, with high rates of incidence in Australia, New Zealand, North America (especially Texas and Florida), Latin America, and Northern Europe. According to a WHO report, about 48,000 melanoma related deaths occur worldwide per year.
TCGA_Stomach adenocarcinoma	STAD	Stomach	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	162	Stomach cancer, also called gastric cancer, forms in tissues lining the stomach. In 2010, 21,000 Americans were estimated to have been diagnosed and 10,570 were expected to have died from stomach cancer. Stomach cancer is more common in men and most people diagnosed are over 70 years old. About 95 percent of all gastric cancers are adenocarcinomas, the type of cancer being studied by TCGA. About 80 percent of people with stomach cancer are diagnosed with advanced cancer. As a result, fewer than 15 percent of these people will survive longer than five years after their diagnosis because this cancer tends to quickly spread to other parts of the body
TCGA_Thyroid carcinoma	THCA	Thyroid	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	274	Thyroid cancer develops in the follicular cells of the thyroid. The thyroid gland is located at the front of the neck below the voice box. The thyroid gland secretes hormones that control heart rate, blood pressure, body temperature and weight. It is estimated that approximately 45,000 Americans were diagnosed and about 1,700 died from thyroid cancer in 2010.1 Papillary thyroid carcinoma, the type being studied by TCGA, is the most common type of thyroid cancer, accounting for 80 percent of all cases. It is diagnosed most commonly in patients who are around the age of 49 and it is more common in women.1 Thyroid cancer grows very slowly and if it is diagnosed early, this cancer can be cured.
TCGA_Uterine Corpus Endometrioid Carcinoma	UCEC	Uterus	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	462	Endometrial cancer develops in the cells that form the inner lining of the uterus, or the endometrium, and is one of the most common cancers of the female reproductive system among American women. In 2010, approximately 43,000 women in the United States were estimated to have been diagnosed and almost 8,000 to have died of endometrial cancer. This cancer occurs most commonly in women aged 60 years or older. About 69 percent of endometrial cancers are diagnosed at an early stage, and as a result about 83 percent of women will survive five years following the time of diagnosis.
TCGA_Kidney Chromophobe	KICH	Kidney	TCGA	Cancer	Homo sapiens	65	Unclear